---
title: '405'
Project Title: Combating Exploitative Child Labor through Education in the Dominican
  Republic
Start Year: '2007'
End Year: '2011'
ISO3 Code: DOM
Region: Latin America and the Caribbean
Country: Dominican Republic
Client/ Donor: U.S. Department of Labor
Is Current Project? (true/false): ''
Practice Area:
- Education, Gender and Youth
Contract Value USD: '4000000.00'
---

In September 2007, DevTech and its associates signed a cooperative agreement with the U.S. Department of Labor to lead the Combating Exploitative Child Labor through Education in the Dominican Republic project. This grant is a direct reflection of the success of the DevTech project, Combating Child Labor through Education in the Dominican Republic, completed in 2007. In association with two Dominican organizations and a number of local subcontractors, DevTech built upon the successes of the last project and introduced new innovations to offer Dominican youth an alternative to exploitative child labor.This project aimed to prevent or withdraw 10,000 Dominican youths (7,500 children and 2,500 adolescents) from exploitative child labor by scaling up the educational models introduced in the first project and introducing new programs to provide educational alternatives to adolescents. Espacios Para Crecer (\"Spaces for Growth\")A major component of this project was the continuation of the \"Espacios para Crecer\" (EpC) model introduced in the previous project. In the Dominican Republic, the overcrowding of schools necessitates a shift system where half of the students attend school during a morning shift, and half during an afternoon shift. The EpCs provide a second shift of non-formal education that complements the Dominican national curriculum. This project saw the opening of new EpCs in various regions throughout the Dominican Republic. The facilitators of these new EpCs received training in Quantum Learning® methodology. Funding provided by the United States Department of Labor under cooperative agreement E-9-K-3-0054 financed the development of the EpC materials.The Espacios Para Emprender (\"Spaces for Entrepreneurship\") ModelThe cornerstone of this project was the introduction of a vocational training program geared toward adolescents. The goal of the \"Espacios para Emprender\" (EpEs) is to help out-of-school youth gain marketable skills through compensatory education programming. Specifically, volunteer facilitators who serve as counselors guide the adolescents toward vocational training programs based on their desired careers. The EpE program also provides job placement support to adolescents.